
.. _plugin-badwords:

The BadWords plugin
===================

.. _command-channel-list:

list
^^^^

Returns the list of words being censored.

.. _command-channel-remove:

remove <word> [<word> ...]
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Removes *<word>s* from the list of words being censored.

.. _command-channel-add:

add <word> [<word> ...]
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Adds all *<word>s* to the list of words being censored.



.. _plugin-badwords-config:

Configuration
-------------

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.kick:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.kick
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: False

Determines whether the bot will kick people with a warning when they use bad words.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.kick.message:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.kick.message
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: You have been kicked for using a word prohibited in the presence of this bot. Please use more appropriate language in the future.

Determines the kick message used by the bot when kicking users for saying bad words.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.nastyChars:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.nastyChars
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: !@#&

Determines what characters will replace bad words; a chunk of these characters matching the size of the replaced bad word will be used to replace the bad words you've configured.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.public:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.public
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: True

Determines whether this plugin is publicly visible.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.replaceMethod:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.replaceMethod
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: nastyCharacters

Determines the manner in which bad words will be replaced. 'nastyCharacters' (the default) will replace a bad word with the same number of 'nasty characters' (like those used in comic books; configurable by supybot.plugins.BadWords.nastyChars). 'simple' will replace a bad word with a simple strings (regardless of the length of the bad word); this string is configurable via supybot.plugins.BadWords.simpleReplacement.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.requireWordBoundaries:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.requireWordBoundaries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: False

Determines whether the bot will require bad words to be independent words, or whether it will censor them within other words. For instance, if 'darn' is a bad word, then if this is true, 'darn' will be censored, but 'darnit' will not. You probably want this to be false. After changing this setting, the BadWords regexp needs to be regenerated by adding/removing a word to the list, or reloading the plugin.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.simpleReplacement:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.simpleReplacement
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: [CENSORED]

Determines what word will replace bad words if the replacement method is 'simple'.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.stripFormatting:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.stripFormatting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: True

Determines whether the bot will strip formatting characters from messages before it checks them for bad words. If this is False, it will be relatively trivial to circumvent this plugin's filtering. If it's True, however, it will interact poorly with other plugins that do coloring or bolding of text.

.. _supybot.plugins.BadWords.words:

supybot.plugins.BadWords.words
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Default value: []

Determines what words are considered to be 'bad' so the bot won't say them.

